Updates for Provider Families (#150)
upbound/docs: content/upbound-marketplace/providers.md

title: "Official Providers"
weight: 20
---
Upbound creates, maintains and supports a set of Crossplane providers called **official providers**.  

> Upbound builds, tests and supports official providers. The Upbound official providers are open source under the Apache 2.0 license. Upbound recommends the official providers for all deployments.

Reviewer: "Upbound creates, maintains and supports"
"Upbound builds, tests and supports official providers"

Feels duplicative?

Find official providers in the [Upbound Marketplace](https://marketplace.upbound.io/providers?tier=official). 

> All official providers have a purple `Official` tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All official providers have an `Official` tag to identify them.
```

Let's not mention the color so we don't have to update the docs if there's a design change at some stage.

{{<img src="/upbound-marketplace/images/provider-by-upbound.png" alt="Official provider tag" >}}

## Provider families

> Upbound packages the official providers for Amazon AWS, Google GCP and Microsoft Azure as a "family." 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upbound packages each of the official providers for Amazon AWS, Google GCP and Microsoft Azure as a "family." 
```

Trying to avoid it sounding like AWS, GCP and Azure together make a family.

A provider family organizes the provider's resources into unique packages, organized by a common set of services.

> Provider families reduce the resources required to install and run providers and improve performance.

Reviewer: Without stating that we are comparing them to the monolithic version of the provider, to a new user not aware of the challenges with the monolithic packages, this sentence might be redundant. Should we qualify this statement?

Author: How's this-

> Provider families reduce the resources required to install and run providers and improve performance over a single monolithic provider.

### Provider family requirements

Provider families have the following requirements and restrictions:

> * Crossplane version 1.12.1 or [UXP]({{<ref "/uxp">}}) version 1.12.1-up or later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Crossplane version 1.12.1 or [UXP]({{<ref "/uxp">}}) version 1.12.1-up.1 or later
```

* Remove existing [monolithic providers](#monolithic-official-providers) matching the new provider family. 

{{<hint "warning" >}}
If a provider family installs into a cluster with an existing monolithic provider, the family provider doesn't take effect. 

The monolithic provider continues to own all provider resource endpoints until it's removed.

For information on migrating from monolithic providers to provider families read the 
[family providers migration guide]({{<ref "/knowledge-base/migrate-to-provider-families">}})
{{< /hint >}}

### Installing a provider family

> Installing a provider family is identical to installing other Crossplane providers.

Reviewer 2: Agreed that installation of family providers are identical to installation of any other providers. However, things get a bit complicated when there is a need to introduce a `ControllerConfig`, e.g. IRSA, since the base (or family, or config) provider is installed as a dependency if the user does not explicitly install it upfront. 

I believe we should document this as well which is quite a typical need to production scenarios.

Author: Do we have any notes on what's different that I can reference?

Reviewer 2: I am not aware of any. Let me write down something:

When you install a service provider from a provider family (e.g. `provider-aws-s3`), the `provider-family` service provider (e.g. `provider-family-aws`) is installed as a dependency. However, there are certain cases where you would need to install the `provider-family` provider separately before installing other service providers.

- You use a `ControllerConfig` for some reason, e.g. IRSA or configuring resource requests/limits on the provider controller pod.

The procedure is roughly:

1. Create your `ControllerConfig`.
1. Install the `provider-family` service provider (e.g. `provider-family-aws`) with a reference to the `ControllerConfig`.
1. Wait until it is Installed & Healthy
1. Instal the remaining service providers with a reference to the `ControllerConfig`.

- You use a private registry where you've mirrored the providers you're interested in.

1. Install the `provider-family` service provider (e.g. `provider-family-aws`) pointing to your private registry.
1. Instal the remaining service providers with [skipDependencyResolution](https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pkg.crossplane.io/Provider/v1@v1.12.1#spec-skipDependencyResolution).

Provider.

```yaml
apiVersion: pkg.crossplane.io/v1
kind: Provider
metadata:
  name: upbound-provider-aws-s3
spec:
  package: xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-aws-s3:v0.37.0
  skipDependencyResolution: true
---
apiVersion: pkg.crossplane.io/v1
kind: Provider
metadata:
  name: upbound-provider-aws-ec2
spec:
  package: xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-aws-ec2:v0.37.0
  skipDependencyResolution: true
```

{{< /expand >}}

View the installed providers with `kubectl get providers`

```shell {copy-lines="1",label="getproviders"}
kubectl get providers
NAME                          INSTALLED   HEALTHY   PACKAGE                                               AGE
upbound-provider-aws-ec2      True        True      xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-aws-ec2:v0.37.0      25m
upbound-provider-aws-s3       True        True      xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-aws-s3:v0.37.0       25m
upbound-provider-family-aws   True        True      xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-family-aws:v0.37.0   24m
```

The first provider installed of a family also installs an extra
{{<hover label="getproviders" line="5">}}provider-family{{</hover>}} Provider.
The `provider-family` provider manages the ProviderConfig

> for all service providers in the same family. 

Reviewer: We should look to use the terminology "config provider" for the family's config provider package (provider-family-gcp,provider-family-azure,provider-family-aws). See https://link.excalidraw.com/l/29ZB2bl8Sjx/1LR3n45hm6p

Author: How about replacing 
"The `provider-family` provider manages the ProviderConfig for all service providers in the same family. "

with

This _config provider_ manages the ProviderConfig
for all service providers in the same family.

Author: Understood. I know they are just another provider, but do we have a preferred term to use to identify them? Specifically trying to say "a provider that is a member of a family, related to other providers of the same family and not the config provider"

### Using ControllerConfigs

> The ControllerConfig applies settings to a Provider Pod. With family providers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [ControllerConfig](https://docs.crossplane.io/latest/concepts/packages/#speccontrollerconfigref) applies settings to a Provider Pod. With family providers
```

> each service is an unique Pod running in the cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
each provider is a unique Pod running in the cluster. 
```

> When using ControllerConfigs with family providers, each service provider needs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using ControllerConfigs with family providers, each provider needs
```

a ControllerConfig applied.

> For example, both service providers reference the same 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, both providers reference the same 
```

{{<hover label="cc" line="8">}}controllerConfigRef.name{{</hover >}}.

```yaml
apiVersion: pkg.crossplane.io/v1
kind: Provider
metadata:
  name: upbound-provider-aws-s3
spec:
  package: xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-aws-s3:v0.37.0
  controllerConfigRef:
    name: my-controllerconfig
---
apiVersion: pkg.crossplane.io/v1
kind: Provider
metadata:
  name: upbound-provider-aws-ec2
spec:
  package: xpkg.upbound.io/upbound/provider-aws-ec2:v0.37.0
  controllerConfigRef:
    name: my-controllerconfig
---
apiVersion: pkg.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: ControllerConfig
metadata:
  name: my-controllerconfig
```

## Monolithic official providers

> Upbound delivered the official providers as a single monolithic provider
> beginning in October, 2022. Starting June 13, 2023 Upbound split the official 
> providers into smaller family providers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upbound delivered the AWS, GCP and Azure official providers as a single 
monolithic provider beginning in October, 2022. Starting June 13, 2023 
Upbound split these official providers into provider families consisting 
out of many smaller providers. 
```
Since we have official providers that are not being split (provider-azuread and provider-terraform) I feel it's worth qualifying which providers are being split.
